---
layout: post
title: Science Communication
date: 2021-05-10
description: A posting about science communication class
---

## Science Communication

Spring 2020 I took a Science Communication class at Auburn University taught by [Dr. Karen McNeal](https://www.auburn.edu/cosam/faculty/geosciences/McNeal/index.htm/). The course was created as a requrement for the NRT Climate Reilience Program, more on that later. As part of that class student created several different dileravables. Once of those is a blog posting, mine is below. Another requirement was the creation of a 3-minute research video.

## Would you like some bread with that sandwich?

Crop failure is something that people in developed countries do not think about regularly unless their livelihoods are dependent on agriculture. However, with the increase in global connectivity and media coverage, people who may not have previously aware of crop failure events are becoming more aware. Ways in which we become aware are browsing social media and seeing locus decimated crops in Africa (year), severe weather impacts, rumors of increased food prices, or drought in the southeast United States. We become aware when our favorite bread or snacks increase in price, or the shelf at our local grocery store sits empty of our favorite produce and products with a “Sorry for the inconvenience…” sign instead. Eventually, supply chains recover, crop growing conditions improve, and a new crop is planted. We continue with our busy lives a food price increase or shortage a distant memory.


**How did we get to produce, like apples, available year-round?**

Increased global connectivity has resulted in produce and foods that were once reserved for in-season consumption, or wealthy individuals who could afford the steep price are now available year-round with little fluctuations in price. With efficient supply chains, cold storage, and advancement of agriculture practices, we can ship produce too far away locations before the produce can overripe and rot. Agriculture staples are commonly grown in regions of high productivity, usually known as breadbaskets.  A common breadbasket for corn and soybeans is located in the Midwest region of the United States. Breadbaskets include India (rice and wheat), China (corn, rice, rice, wheat), among others. However, similar to putting all our eggs in one basket, a crop failure event in one of these high productivity regions can have a rippling effect.


**But what causes food shortages and price hikes?**

Globally one-third of yield variability is due to climate variability; for the United States, this ratio is a little larger. Like Russia and the rest of the world, the United States is no stranger to environmental crop losses. The United States has experienced several multibillion-dollar losses in agriculture and property damages from weather-related events. Most notably, the droughts of 1988 and 2012 and the flooding of 1993 resulted in up to 70% loss of crops and property damages.

The 2010 growing season began as normal in Russia temperature began to rise in early summer. However, around the same time, an extended period of dryness a drought also started. Temperatures continued to climb into a heatwave during the middle of the growing season. The combination of intense temperatures and drought caused wildfires in the region and added stress on the wheat crop. When the Russian government realized that the amount of wheat yield would be less than anticipated, based on previous years, they placed a ban on exporting and importing wheat.  Resulting in domestic and global panic, hoarding, and the cost of wheat skyrocketed, taking with it packaged wheat products.

Causes of crop failure vary depending on geographic region and can be environmental, non-environmental, or a combination in origin. Non-environmental causes of crop failure or loss include political turmoil where producers are forced away from tending to their land and crops. Environmental causes of crop failure include drought, flooding, pest, either insects or disease, heat or cold.

Are there any crop failure events that you remember in the not-so-distant past or events that you remember?
